# JTamaro

JTamaro is a Java educational library designed for teaching problem
decomposition using graphics.

JTamaro is a close cousin to
the [PyTamaro](https://github.com/LuceResearchLab/pytamaro) compositional
graphics library for Python.
Unlike PyTamaro, JTamaro also includes simple purely functional data
structures (with types like `Sequence`, `Option`, and `Pair`), and functionality
for developing purely-functional interactive applications (with a fluent API to
configure and run an Interaction).
JTamaro provides a minimal API, much smaller than the Java API surface covered
in standard Java programming courses.

The library promotes purity, immutability, parametric polymorphism, subtyping
polymorphism, and higher-order functions. It does this by focusing on
interfaces, generics and modern features of the Java programming languages such
as records, and by a design that encourages immutability and the composition of
independent components.

It is featured in our
textbook, [Composition in Java](https://luce.si.usi.ch/composition-in-java/).

## Components

### `lib/data`

Provides implementation for the following types:

- `Function{0-4}`: interfaces for function objects with up to 4 arguments
- `Option`: the Option(al) / Maybe monad. Used to handle errors
- `Pair`: tuple of two elements
- `Sequence`: ordered list of elements of a certain type

### `lib/graphic`

```java
import jtamaro.graphic.Graphic;
import jtamaro.graphic.Colors;
import jtamaro.graphic.Graphics;

public class Example {

  public static void example() {
    Graphic h = Graphics.rectangle(200, 60, Colors.WHITE);
    Graphic v = Graphics.rectangle(60, 200, Colors.WHITE);
    Graphic cross = Graphics.overlay(h, v);
  }
}
```

Using static imports, we can eliminate the need for mentioning class Graphics in
each call:

```java
import jtamaro.graphic.Graphic;

import static jtamaro.graphic.Colors.*;
import static jtamaro.graphic.Graphics.*;

public class Example {

  public static void example() {
    Graphic h = rectangle(200, 60, WHITE);
    Graphic v = rectangle(60, 200, WHITE);
    Graphic cross = overlay(h, v);
  }
}
```

### `lib/interaction`

Interaction allows to develop an interactive application:

```java
import jtamaro.data.Pair;
import jtamaro.graphic.Graphic;

import static jtamaro.graphic.Colors.*;
import static jtamaro.graphic.Fonts.*;
import static jtamaro.graphic.Graphics.*;
import static jtamaro.interaction.KeyboardKey.*;
import static jtamaro.io.IO.*;

public class Example {

  public static void example() {
    interact(0)
        .withKeyReleaseHandler((model, key) -> model + switch (key.keyCode()) {
          case UP -> 1;
          case DOWN -> -1;
          default -> 0;
        })
        .withRenderer(model -> text(String.valueOf(model),
            MONOSPACED, 100, BLACK))
        .run();
  }
}
```

### `lib/io`

The colors and graphics are pure.
Code that performs side effects (e.g., showing a graphic on the screen)
is accessible through methods of class `IO`:

```java
import static jtamaro.graphic.Colors.*;
import static jtamaro.graphic.Graphics.*;
import static jtamaro.io.IO.*;

public class Example {

  public static void example() {
    show(rectangle(200, 100, RED));
  }
}
```

## Build

This project uses Gradle.
It contains multiple subprojects:

- `example` - An application that shows how to use the features of the library.
- `lib` - Main jTamaro module. It includes the data structures, graphics,
  interaction and I/O.
- `music` - A midi-based music library that allows to play notes and chords.

To just the build library's jar file for usage in other projects:

```bash
./gradlew :lib:jar
```

To build everything and run the example app:

```bash
./gradlew :example:run
```

To run individual demos in the example app, run the corresponding classes
with `main` methods in the `example` directory from within an IDE that
understands gradle (e.g., VS Code) and thus will find (and if needed build) the
library.

### Requirements

The output will be in `lib/build/libs/lib-*.jar`

**Note**: The library is targeting Java 25, and it makes extensive use of the
latest additions to the language (records, sealed classes, pattern matching...).
Older Java versions are not supported.

## Documentation

The documentation is published
at [this link](https://luceresearchlab.github.io/jtamaro), or it can be
generated by running the following command (output at `lib/build/docs/javadoc`):

```bash
./gradlew :lib:javadoc
```
